plugins/lyra-ux-designer/skills/using-ux-designer/SKILL.md, before:

---
name: using-ux-designer
description: Use when starting UX/UI design work, critiquing designs, or creating new interfaces - routes to specific Lyra UX skills based on task type (teaching, critique, creation) and platform context (web, mobile, desktop, game)
---

# Using UX Designer

## Overview

This meta-skill routes you to the right UX design skills based on your situation. Load this skill when you need UX expertise but aren't sure which specific skill to use.

**Core Principle**: Different UX tasks require different skills. Match your situation to the appropriate skill, load only what you need.

## When to Use

Load this skill when:
- Starting any UX/UI design task
- User mentions: "design", "UX", "UI", "interface", "user experience", "layout", "navigation"
- You need to critique or review a design
- You need to create a new interface or feature
- User asks about UX principles or concepts

**Don't use for**: Backend logic, database design, pure technical implementation without UX implications

---

## Routing by Situation

### Learning & Explanation

**Symptoms**: "What is...", "Explain...", "Teach me about...", "How does X work in UX?"

**Route to**: `lyra/ux-designer/ux-fundamentals`

**Examples**:
- "What is information architecture?" → ux-fundamentals
- "Explain visual hierarchy" → ux-fundamentals
- "How do I think about accessibility?" → ux-fundamentals

---

### Design Critique & Review

**Symptoms**: "Review this design", "Critique this interface", "Is this usable?", "Does this follow best practices?"

**Route to**: Relevant competency skills based on critique focus

**General Review** (no specific focus):
- `lyra/ux-designer/visual-design-foundations` (visual hierarchy, color, typography)
- `lyra/ux-designer/information-architecture` (content organization, navigation)
- `lyra/ux-designer/accessibility-and-inclusive-design` (WCAG, inclusive design)

**Specific Focus**:
- Visual issues (color, contrast, hierarchy) → `visual-design-foundations`
- Navigation/findability issues → `information-architecture`
- Interaction feedback, touch targets → `interaction-design-patterns`
- Accessibility concerns → `accessibility-and-inclusive-design`

**Add platform extension** if design is platform-specific:
- Mobile app → Add `mobile-design-patterns`
- Web dashboard → Add `web-application-design`
- Desktop software → Add `desktop-software-design`
- Game interface → Add `game-ui-design`

---

### New Interface Design

**Symptoms**: "Design a...", "Create interface for...", "Build a [feature] screen"

**Route to**: Competency skills + platform extension

**Standard Web/Mobile Feature**:
1. `lyra/ux-designer/visual-design-foundations` (layout, hierarchy, color)
2. `lyra/ux-designer/interaction-design-patterns` (buttons, feedback, states)
3. Platform-specific:
   - Mobile → `mobile-design-patterns`
   - Web app → `web-application-design`

**Complex Navigation/IA**:
1. `lyra/ux-designer/information-architecture` (content structure, nav systems)
2. `lyra/ux-designer/visual-design-foundations` (visual hierarchy)
3. Platform extension as needed

**Research Phase** (early discovery):
1. `lyra/ux-designer/user-research-and-validation` (understand users first)
2. Then return to design skills once research complete

---

### Specific UX Domains

#### Visual Design Issues

**Symptoms**: "Colors don't work", "Typography feels off", "Hierarchy unclear", "Layout cramped"

**Route to**: `lyra/ux-designer/visual-design-foundations`

**Add**: `accessibility-and-inclusive-design` if contrast/readability concerns

---

#### Navigation & Findability

**Symptoms**: "Users can't find features", "Navigation confusing", "Menu structure", "Content organization"

**Route to**: `lyra/ux-designer/information-architecture`

**Add**: Platform extension for platform-specific nav patterns

---

#### Interaction & Feedback

**Symptoms**: "Button states unclear", "No loading feedback", "Micro-interactions", "Touch targets too small"

**Route to**: `lyra/ux-designer/interaction-design-patterns`

**Add**: Platform extension for platform-specific interaction conventions

---

#### Accessibility & Inclusion

**Symptoms**: "WCAG compliance", "Accessibility audit", "Colorblind-safe", "Keyboard navigation", "Screen reader"

**Route to**: `lyra/ux-designer/accessibility-and-inclusive-design`

**Note**: This skill should be referenced by all other design decisions (accessibility is universal)

---

#### User Research & Validation

**Symptoms**: "Understand users", "User interviews", "Usability testing", "Mental models", "Journey mapping"

**Route to**: `lyra/ux-designer/user-research-and-validation`

**Add**: Other skills once research informs design direction

---

## Platform-Specific Routing

### Mobile (iOS/Android)

**Symptoms**: "Mobile app", "iOS", "Android", "Touch interface", "Phone", "Tablet"

**Route to**:
- Core competency skills (visual, IA, interaction) as needed
- **Always add**: `lyra/ux-designer/mobile-design-patterns`

**Mobile-Specific Concerns**:
- Touch targets (44x44pt iOS, 48x48dp Android)
- Gestures (swipe, pinch, long-press)
- Platform conventions (iOS HIG vs Material Design)
- One-handed use, thumb zones

---

### Web Applications

**Symptoms**: "Web app", "Dashboard", "SaaS", "Data visualization", "Admin panel", "Responsive design"

**Route to**:
- Core competency skills as needed
- **Always add**: `lyra/ux-designer/web-application-design`

**Web-Specific Concerns**:
- Responsive breakpoints
- Complex data display (tables, charts)
- Keyboard shortcuts, power-user workflows
- Multi-tasking (tabs, split views)

---

### Desktop Software

**Symptoms**: "Desktop app", "Electron", "Native application", "Multi-window", "Keyboard shortcuts"

**Route to**:
- Core competency skills as needed
- **Always add**: `lyra/ux-designer/desktop-software-design`

**Desktop-Specific Concerns**:
- Window management (multi-window, panels)
- Keyboard-first workflows
- Workspace customization
- Power-user features (preferences, scripting)

---

### Game UI

**Symptoms**: "Game", "HUD", "Menu system", "Game interface", "In-game UI", "Player experience"

**Route to**:
- Core competency skills as needed
- **Always add**: `lyra/ux-designer/game-ui-design`

**Game-Specific Concerns**:
- Visibility vs immersion (diegetic UI)
- Controller/gamepad navigation
- Readability during action
- Performance impact (frame rate)

---

## Multi-Skill Scenarios

### Complete Feature Design (Mobile Login)

**Load in order**:
1. `visual-design-foundations` (layout, button hierarchy)
2. `interaction-design-patterns` (form feedback, button states)
3. `accessibility-and-inclusive-design` (form labels, contrast)
4. `mobile-design-patterns` (touch targets, platform conventions)

---

### Dashboard Redesign (Web)

**Load in order**:
1. `information-architecture` (organize data, navigation)
2. `visual-design-foundations` (hierarchy, chart design)
3. `web-application-design` (responsive, data display patterns)
4. `accessibility-and-inclusive-design` (data table accessibility)

---

### Game HUD Evaluation

**Load in order**:
1. `visual-design-foundations` (readability, contrast)
2. `game-ui-design` (immersion, performance, input method)
3. `accessibility-and-inclusive-design` (colorblind-safe indicators)

---

## Cross-Faction Integration

### Lyra + Muna (Technical Writer)

**When designing documentation UX**:
- `lyra/ux-designer/information-architecture` (organize docs)
- `muna/technical-writer/documentation-structure` (content structure)
- `muna/technical-writer/clarity-and-style` (microcopy, UI text)

**Example**: "Design documentation site navigation" → Load IA + documentation-structure

---

### Lyra + Ordis (Security Architect)

**When designing secure interfaces**:
- `lyra/ux-designer/visual-design-foundations` (secure feedback, error states)
- `ordis/security-architect/threat-modeling` (authentication UX threats)

**Example**: "Design login with MFA" → Load interaction-patterns + threat-modeling

---

## Decision Tree

```
User Request
    |
    ├─ "What is...?" / "Explain..." → ux-fundamentals
    |
    ├─ "Review this design"
    |   ├─ General → visual-design + IA + accessibility
    |   └─ Specific concern → Relevant competency skill
    |       └─ Add platform extension if platform-specific
    |
    ├─ "Design a [feature]"
    |   ├─ Research phase? → user-research-and-validation first
    |   └─ Design phase
    |       ├─ Identify competencies needed (visual, IA, interaction)
    |       ├─ Detect platform (mobile, web, desktop, game)
    |       └─ Load competency + platform extension
    |
    └─ Specific domain
        ├─ Visual → visual-design-foundations
        ├─ Navigation → information-architecture
        ├─ Interaction → interaction-design-patterns
        ├─ Accessibility → accessibility-and-inclusive-design
        └─ Research → user-research-and-validation
```

---

## Common Patterns

### Pattern 1: "I need general UX advice"
**Load**: `ux-fundamentals` (teaches principles)

### Pattern 2: "Critique my [platform] design"
**Load**: visual-design + IA + accessibility + [platform-extension]

### Pattern 3: "Design [feature] for [platform]"
**Load**: Relevant competencies + [platform-extension]

### Pattern 4: "Is this accessible?"
**Load**: `accessibility-and-inclusive-design` (primary)
**Reference**: visual-design (contrast), interaction-design (keyboard nav)

### Pattern 5: "How do users navigate this?"
**Load**: `information-architecture` (primary)
**Add**: user-research-and-validation (if testing/validation needed)

---

## Benefits of Routing

**Focused expertise**: Load only what's needed for the task
**Clear boundaries**: Each skill has distinct responsibility
**Composable**: Combine skills for complex scenarios
**Efficient**: Avoid loading all 11 skills at once
**Explicit**: User sees which skills are active

---

## Related Skills

**All Lyra UX Designer skills**:
- `lyra/ux-designer/ux-fundamentals` - Teaching and principles
- `lyra/ux-designer/visual-design-foundations` - Color, typography, hierarchy
- `lyra/ux-designer/information-architecture` - Navigation, content organization
- `lyra/ux-designer/interaction-design-patterns` - Feedback, micro-interactions
- `lyra/ux-designer/accessibility-and-inclusive-design` - Inclusive design, WCAG
- `lyra/ux-designer/user-research-and-validation` - Research methods, testing
- `lyra/ux-designer/mobile-design-patterns` - iOS/Android patterns
- `lyra/ux-designer/web-application-design` - Web app patterns
- `lyra/ux-designer/desktop-software-design` - Desktop app patterns
- `lyra/ux-designer/game-ui-design` - Game interface patterns

**Cross-faction**:
- `muna/technical-writer/*` - Documentation UX and microcopy
- `ordis/security-architect/*` - Security-aware interface design

Commit message:

Refactor skill descriptions for clarity and conciseness across multiple plugins, enhancing readability and focus on key concepts. Updated descriptions in the following skills: value-based methods, context window management, LLM evaluation metrics, LLM fine-tuning strategies, LLM inference optimization, LLM safety alignment, prompt engineering patterns, RAG architecture patterns, using LLM specialist, deployment strategies, experiment tracking and versioning, hardware optimization strategies, MLOps pipeline automation, model compression techniques, model serving patterns, production debugging techniques, production monitoring and alerting, quantization for inference, scaling and load balancing, using ML production, architecture design principles, attention mechanisms catalog, CNN families and selection, generative model families, graph neural networks basics, normalization techniques, sequence models comparison, transformer architecture deep dive, using neural architectures, checkpointing and reproducibility, custom autograd functions, debugging techniques, distributed training strategies, mixed precision and optimization, module design patterns, performance profiling, tensor operations and memory, using PyTorch engineering, numerical methods, using simulation foundations, batch size and memory tradeoffs, data augmentation strategies, experiment tracking, gradient management, hyperparameter tuning, learning rate scheduling, loss functions and objectives, optimization algorithms, overfitting prevention, training loop architecture, and using training optimization.

plugins/lyra-ux-designer/skills/using-ux-designer/SKILL.md, after:

---
name: using-ux-designer
description: Route to the right UX skill based on your task and platform context
---

# Using UX Designer

## Overview

This meta-skill routes you to the right UX design skills based on your situation. Load this skill when you need UX expertise but aren't sure which specific skill to use.

**Core Principle**: Different UX tasks require different skills. Match your situation to the appropriate skill, load only what you need.

## When to Use

Load this skill when:
- Starting any UX/UI design task
- User mentions: "design", "UX", "UI", "interface", "user experience", "layout", "navigation"
- You need to critique or review a design
- You need to create a new interface or feature
- User asks about UX principles or concepts

**Don't use for**: Backend logic, database design, pure technical implementation without UX implications

---

## Routing by Situation

### Learning & Explanation

**Symptoms**: "What is...", "Explain...", "Teach me about...", "How does X work in UX?"

**Route to**: `lyra/ux-designer/ux-fundamentals`

**Examples**:
- "What is information architecture?" → ux-fundamentals
- "Explain visual hierarchy" → ux-fundamentals
- "How do I think about accessibility?" → ux-fundamentals

---

### Design Critique & Review

**Symptoms**: "Review this design", "Critique this interface", "Is this usable?", "Does this follow best practices?"

**Route to**: Relevant competency skills based on critique focus

**General Review** (no specific focus):
- `lyra/ux-designer/visual-design-foundations` (visual hierarchy, color, typography)
- `lyra/ux-designer/information-architecture` (content organization, navigation)
- `lyra/ux-designer/accessibility-and-inclusive-design` (WCAG, inclusive design)

**Specific Focus**:
- Visual issues (color, contrast, hierarchy) → `visual-design-foundations`
- Navigation/findability issues → `information-architecture`
- Interaction feedback, touch targets → `interaction-design-patterns`
- Accessibility concerns → `accessibility-and-inclusive-design`

**Add platform extension** if design is platform-specific:
- Mobile app → Add `mobile-design-patterns`
- Web dashboard → Add `web-application-design`
- Desktop software → Add `desktop-software-design`
- Game interface → Add `game-ui-design`

---

### New Interface Design

**Symptoms**: "Design a...", "Create interface for...", "Build a [feature] screen"

**Route to**: Competency skills + platform extension

**Standard Web/Mobile Feature**:
1. `lyra/ux-designer/visual-design-foundations` (layout, hierarchy, color)
2. `lyra/ux-designer/interaction-design-patterns` (buttons, feedback, states)
3. Platform-specific:
   - Mobile → `mobile-design-patterns`
   - Web app → `web-application-design`

**Complex Navigation/IA**:
1. `lyra/ux-designer/information-architecture` (content structure, nav systems)
2. `lyra/ux-designer/visual-design-foundations` (visual hierarchy)
3. Platform extension as needed

**Research Phase** (early discovery):
1. `lyra/ux-designer/user-research-and-validation` (understand users first)
2. Then return to design skills once research complete

---

### Specific UX Domains

#### Visual Design Issues

**Symptoms**: "Colors don't work", "Typography feels off", "Hierarchy unclear", "Layout cramped"

**Route to**: `lyra/ux-designer/visual-design-foundations`

**Add**: `accessibility-and-inclusive-design` if contrast/readability concerns

---

#### Navigation & Findability

**Symptoms**: "Users can't find features", "Navigation confusing", "Menu structure", "Content organization"

**Route to**: `lyra/ux-designer/information-architecture`

**Add**: Platform extension for platform-specific nav patterns

---

#### Interaction & Feedback

**Symptoms**: "Button states unclear", "No loading feedback", "Micro-interactions", "Touch targets too small"

**Route to**: `lyra/ux-designer/interaction-design-patterns`

**Add**: Platform extension for platform-specific interaction conventions

---

#### Accessibility & Inclusion

**Symptoms**: "WCAG compliance", "Accessibility audit", "Colorblind-safe", "Keyboard navigation", "Screen reader"

**Route to**: `lyra/ux-designer/accessibility-and-inclusive-design`

**Note**: This skill should be referenced by all other design decisions (accessibility is universal)

---

#### User Research & Validation

**Symptoms**: "Understand users", "User interviews", "Usability testing", "Mental models", "Journey mapping"

**Route to**: `lyra/ux-designer/user-research-and-validation`

**Add**: Other skills once research informs design direction

---

## Platform-Specific Routing

### Mobile (iOS/Android)

**Symptoms**: "Mobile app", "iOS", "Android", "Touch interface", "Phone", "Tablet"

**Route to**:
- Core competency skills (visual, IA, interaction) as needed
- **Always add**: `lyra/ux-designer/mobile-design-patterns`

**Mobile-Specific Concerns**:
- Touch targets (44x44pt iOS, 48x48dp Android)
- Gestures (swipe, pinch, long-press)
- Platform conventions (iOS HIG vs Material Design)
- One-handed use, thumb zones

---

### Web Applications

**Symptoms**: "Web app", "Dashboard", "SaaS", "Data visualization", "Admin panel", "Responsive design"

**Route to**:
- Core competency skills as needed
- **Always add**: `lyra/ux-designer/web-application-design`

**Web-Specific Concerns**:
- Responsive breakpoints
- Complex data display (tables, charts)
- Keyboard shortcuts, power-user workflows
- Multi-tasking (tabs, split views)

---

### Desktop Software

**Symptoms**: "Desktop app", "Electron", "Native application", "Multi-window", "Keyboard shortcuts"

**Route to**:
- Core competency skills as needed
- **Always add**: `lyra/ux-designer/desktop-software-design`

**Desktop-Specific Concerns**:
- Window management (multi-window, panels)
- Keyboard-first workflows
- Workspace customization
- Power-user features (preferences, scripting)

---

### Game UI

**Symptoms**: "Game", "HUD", "Menu system", "Game interface", "In-game UI", "Player experience"

**Route to**:
- Core competency skills as needed
- **Always add**: `lyra/ux-designer/game-ui-design`

**Game-Specific Concerns**:
- Visibility vs immersion (diegetic UI)
- Controller/gamepad navigation
- Readability during action
- Performance impact (frame rate)

---

## Multi-Skill Scenarios

### Complete Feature Design (Mobile Login)

**Load in order**:
1. `visual-design-foundations` (layout, button hierarchy)
2. `interaction-design-patterns` (form feedback, button states)
3. `accessibility-and-inclusive-design` (form labels, contrast)
4. `mobile-design-patterns` (touch targets, platform conventions)

---

### Dashboard Redesign (Web)

**Load in order**:
1. `information-architecture` (organize data, navigation)
2. `visual-design-foundations` (hierarchy, chart design)
3. `web-application-design` (responsive, data display patterns)
4. `accessibility-and-inclusive-design` (data table accessibility)

---

### Game HUD Evaluation

**Load in order**:
1. `visual-design-foundations` (readability, contrast)
2. `game-ui-design` (immersion, performance, input method)
3. `accessibility-and-inclusive-design` (colorblind-safe indicators)

---

## Cross-Faction Integration

### Lyra + Muna (Technical Writer)

**When designing documentation UX**:
- `lyra/ux-designer/information-architecture` (organize docs)
- `muna/technical-writer/documentation-structure` (content structure)
- `muna/technical-writer/clarity-and-style` (microcopy, UI text)

**Example**: "Design documentation site navigation" → Load IA + documentation-structure

---

### Lyra + Ordis (Security Architect)

**When designing secure interfaces**:
- `lyra/ux-designer/visual-design-foundations` (secure feedback, error states)
- `ordis/security-architect/threat-modeling` (authentication UX threats)

**Example**: "Design login with MFA" → Load interaction-patterns + threat-modeling

---

## Decision Tree

```
User Request
    |
    ├─ "What is...?" / "Explain..." → ux-fundamentals
    |
    ├─ "Review this design"
    |   ├─ General → visual-design + IA + accessibility
    |   └─ Specific concern → Relevant competency skill
    |       └─ Add platform extension if platform-specific
    |
    ├─ "Design a [feature]"
    |   ├─ Research phase? → user-research-and-validation first
    |   └─ Design phase
    |       ├─ Identify competencies needed (visual, IA, interaction)
    |       ├─ Detect platform (mobile, web, desktop, game)
    |       └─ Load competency + platform extension
    |
    └─ Specific domain
        ├─ Visual → visual-design-foundations
        ├─ Navigation → information-architecture
        ├─ Interaction → interaction-design-patterns
        ├─ Accessibility → accessibility-and-inclusive-design
        └─ Research → user-research-and-validation
```

---

## Common Patterns

### Pattern 1: "I need general UX advice"
**Load**: `ux-fundamentals` (teaches principles)

### Pattern 2: "Critique my [platform] design"
**Load**: visual-design + IA + accessibility + [platform-extension]

### Pattern 3: "Design [feature] for [platform]"
**Load**: Relevant competencies + [platform-extension]

### Pattern 4: "Is this accessible?"
**Load**: `accessibility-and-inclusive-design` (primary)
**Reference**: visual-design (contrast), interaction-design (keyboard nav)

### Pattern 5: "How do users navigate this?"
**Load**: `information-architecture` (primary)
**Add**: user-research-and-validation (if testing/validation needed)

---

## Benefits of Routing

**Focused expertise**: Load only what's needed for the task
**Clear boundaries**: Each skill has distinct responsibility
**Composable**: Combine skills for complex scenarios
**Efficient**: Avoid loading all 11 skills at once
**Explicit**: User sees which skills are active

---

## Related Skills

**All Lyra UX Designer skills**:
- `lyra/ux-designer/ux-fundamentals` - Teaching and principles
- `lyra/ux-designer/visual-design-foundations` - Color, typography, hierarchy
- `lyra/ux-designer/information-architecture` - Navigation, content organization
- `lyra/ux-designer/interaction-design-patterns` - Feedback, micro-interactions
- `lyra/ux-designer/accessibility-and-inclusive-design` - Inclusive design, WCAG
- `lyra/ux-designer/user-research-and-validation` - Research methods, testing
- `lyra/ux-designer/mobile-design-patterns` - iOS/Android patterns
- `lyra/ux-designer/web-application-design` - Web app patterns
- `lyra/ux-designer/desktop-software-design` - Desktop app patterns
- `lyra/ux-designer/game-ui-design` - Game interface patterns

**Cross-faction**:
- `muna/technical-writer/*` - Documentation UX and microcopy
- `ordis/security-architect/*` - Security-aware interface design
